---
layout: post
title: Enigma machine notes
tags: ['cryptography', 'security']
terms: ['security']
icon: shield-lock
---

### Enigma

The Enigma machine was used during WW2 by the Germans to encrypt and decrypt their day to day communications, this way it couldn't be intercepted and read by the enemy. Each day they would change the settings that were used to encrypt their messages making it extraordinarily difficult to crack, with over 17,000 combinations from the 3 rotors alone. With the ring settings, plugboard with 10 connections, reflector and multiple rotors to choose from in different orders, that 17,000 combinations quickly adds up to over 150 trillion combinations of settings that could be used.

A weakness was found in the encryption system however, allowing us to decipher german messages, this is widely thought to have knocked off 2 years of the war and saved numerous lives in the process.

There are a number of revisions of Enigma, this repository only implements the `M3` version currently. This was probably the most common version used during the war, but was replaced by the `M4` version in some areas of the german military.

#### Random information

- Encryption & Decryption
    - Handled the same way, messages are decrypted using the same settings they were encrypted with. It will just reverse the process.
- Rotors
    - Types (I, II, III, IV, V, VI, VII, VIII)
    - Each type of rotor uses the same set of characters, just ordered differently and with different turnover points.
    - With each key press, the rightmost rotor is rotated, if the turnover point is hit the middle rotor will be rotated as well, which will also rotate the leftmost rotor if the middles turnover point is hit.
    - Ring settings offset the output of the rotor but do not effect the turnover point.
- Plugboard
    - The plugboard is used to map together sets of 2 characters i.e. A and Z.
    - If A and Z are mapped and A is pressed, Z will be transmitted to the next stage (the static rotor) and vice versa.
- Reflector
    - Reflects the received character values paired character back into the leftmost rotor.    
- Process
    - key press -> plugboard -> static rotor -> right rotor -> middle rotor -> left rotor -> reflector -> left rotor -> middle rotor -> right rotor -> static rotor -> plugboard -> lights up the encrypted character value

#### Useful Resources

- [https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Enigma_rotor_details](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Enigma_rotor_details)
- [http://summersidemakerspace.ca/projects/enigma-machine/](http://summersidemakerspace.ca/projects/enigma-machine/)
- [https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Enigma_machine](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Enigma_machine)